---
layout: default
title: Parsing the email from mbox file
---

### Goal of the project

I have an .mbox file from backup on Gmail and I would like to make use of it. What can I do to make use of it?

1. Clean it = remove all promotional emails and general trash
2. Store it somewhere = so that it's easily accesible, potentially a basic database. 
3. Do some basic data analysis based on frequency of the emails received and sent, or speed of reply. 

### Planning

Data analysis is most interesting, but least urgent. The most urgent part is to clean and store. I think I will make 2 copies of the data, one for urgent points (1 and 2) and one for not so urgent but interesting (3).

### Importing to the database

## Install the database 

We will use basic local MongoDB database

1. Go to website of Mongo
2. Download windows install
3. takesages.jpg

## Import the data to the mongodb database

It seems like it's not so easy or straightforward to parse mbox data into the database. 
What should we dooo?

I think I willl import it to pandas and work from there

## Import the data into pandas

### import the data

```python
%pylab inline
import mailbox
import pandas as pd

mb = mailbox.mbox('data.mbox')
```

### parse it so that it includes only particular columns i need

```python
keys = ['Date', 'From', 'To', 'Subject', 'Message-ID']
message_list = []

for message in mb.itervalues():
    dmessage = dict(message.items())
    message_list.append({key:dmessage[key] if key in dmessage.keys() else '' for key in keys})

print(len(message_list), 'messages')
message_list[:3]

```

### view what i have extracted

```python

messages = pd.DataFrame(message_list)
messages.index = messages['Date'].apply(lambda x: pd.to_datetime(x, errors='coerce'))
messages.drop(['Date'], axis=1, inplace=True)
print(messages.shape)
messages.head()
```

### extract only unique emails 

emails = messages.From.unique()

### display extracted emails and not the name 

also removes the indeedmail.com bc these are old recruitment emails we don't care about

```python
import re
contacts = []
for address in emails:
    m = re.search('<(.+?)>', address)
    if m:
        found = m.group(1)
        if 'indeedemail.com' not in found:
            if found not in contacts:
                contacts.append(found)
```

At this point I managed to extract emails that I may need that were deep in the data. 
I will save it for the future reference. 




[back](./)
